COALITON PROVISIONAL AUTHORITY ORDER NUMBER 1 
 
DE-BA`ATHIFICATION OF IRAQI SOCIETY 

 
Pursuant to my authority as Administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), 
relevant U.N. Security Council resolutions, and the laws and usages of war,  
 
Recognizing that the Iraqi people have suffered large scale human rights abuses and 
depravations over many years at the hands of the Ba`ath Party, 
  
Noting the grave concern of Iraqi society regarding the threat posed by the continuation 
of Ba`ath Party networks and personnel in the administration of Iraq, and the intimidation 
of the people of Iraq by Ba`ath Party officials, 
 
Concerned by the continuing threat to the security of the Coalition Forces posed by the 
Iraqi Ba`ath Party, 
 
I hereby promulgate the following: 
 

Section 1 
Disestablishment of the Ba`ath Party 

 
1)  On April 16, 2003 the Coalition Provisional Authority disestablished the Ba`ath 
Party of Iraq.  This order implements the declaration by eliminating the party’s 
structures and removing its leadership from positions of authority and 
responsibility in Iraqi society.  By this means, the Coalition Provisional Authority 
will ensure that representative government in Iraq is not threatened by Ba`athist 
elements returning to power ant that those in positions of authority in the future 
are acceptable to the people of Iraq. 

 

2)  Full members of the Ba`ath Party holding the ranks of ‘Udw Qutriyya (Regional 
Command Member), ‘Udw Far’ (Branch Member). ‘Udw Shu’bah (Section 
Member), and ‘Udw Firqah (Group Member) (together, “Senior Party Members”) 
are herby removed from their positions and banned from future employment in 
the public sector.  These Senior Party Members shall be evaluated for criminal 
conduct or threat to the security of the Coalition.  Those suspected of criminal 
conduct shall be investigated and, if deemed a threat to security or a flight risk, 
detained or placed under house arrest. 

 
3)  Individuals holding positions in the top three layers of management in every 
national government ministry, affiliated corporations and other government 
institutions (e.g., universities and hospitals) shall be interviewed for possible 
affiliation with the Ba`ath Party, and subject to investigation for criminal conduct 
and risk to security.  Any such persons detained to be full members of the Ba`ath 
Party shall be removed from their employment.  This includes those  
 
CPA/ORD/16 May 2003/01 
1 

1

                        

